["Toreador song -
Aria of the hot spring manners" playing]
Aria of the hot spring manners" continues]
[music ends]
-[gentle percussive music]
-[horse neighs]
[gasps]
[woman] Good morning,
how much are these selling for?
These cost one as.
Then I'll take two.
-Thank you much.
-[boy chuckles]
-Come along now.
-Yeah.
That's the stuff.
Man, I'll tell you, Titus, the grilled
chicken here is really something else.
[chuckles] Well, thanks. But still…
it’s been a while since I took over
my dad’s business,
but no matter what, I can't seem to nail
down the flavors this shop is known for.
Even so, as long as I've got customers
like you coming to eat my stuff,
despite the difference in flavor,
I can continue to make a living.
And not a day goes by
where I'm not grateful for your business.
If there's one thing I've noticed
about working this job here in Rome,
it's that it's really coming into its own.
And look, there's a prime example.
The bath?
[Titus] It's not just that bathhouse,
the whole bathing industry is booming
right now.
Baths soothe people's fatigue
and give them strength to keep going.
It's truly a wonderful thing.
Yeah, can't argue with you there.
Speaking of baths, have you seen Lucius?
No, actually, I can't say I have.
[Titus]
When we were kids, I was a real brat.
And Lucius's kindness, his earnestness,
well, it always got on my nerves
for some reason.
I caused him a lot of trouble back then.
But now
I realize how grateful I am to him.
Thanks to him,
I was able to be honest with myself.
Next time we see each other,
I'd love to just kick back and reminisce.
Well, alright, then. What do you say
the three of us have a bath sometime?
Really? Are you sure?
You bet I am.
Let's have some fun, just us guys.
[chuckles] Thanks! I’d like that.
Have a skewer on the house.
-What, seriously?
-Sure!
[grunts]
Sir Modestus, may I have a moment.
Of course. What is it?
You’ve been working
since early this morning.
I think it's safe to say
you've done more than enough for one day.
[Lucius] I know but I'm not leaving
until I've taken care
of the cracks in these vents.
The holes aren't going to plug themselves.
[man] Uh, yes… But that's…
My grandfather built this bathhouse
and my father dedicated his life
to making sure it was maintained.
I can't afford to slack off
when there's work that needs doing.
Yes, sir, I understand.
But with this heat,
perhaps you could use a bit of a break.
Don't you know who you're talking to?
I've dedicated my life
to the construction of bathhouses,
I will not falter to a little heat,
I assure you.
[gasps]
It's certainly true that your father and
grandfather were both excellent designers.
And your grandfather was amazing.
His work on the hot spring pool
in Campania
cemented his place as one of the greatest
architects the Roman Empire has ever seen.
[man] Though afterwards it seems
the tyrant Nero became quite fond of him
and the obsession that grew
caused the old man some painful hardship.
I’m proud of the men
my father and my grandfather were.
-By the way, master…
-Yes, what is it?
I'm no contractor
but I'm repairing the cracked parts of
the wall here to the best of my ability.
However, given how old
and worn out these materials are,
they're definitely
going to need to be replaced.
Is that so?
Well, in the case that such
extensive renovations are truly needed,
I'm prepared to close my doors
if it comes to that.
[gentle music]
Were we a public bathhouse
with the backing of the state,
we'd be able to renovate this place
as much as we wished
but unfortunately, my family
just doesn't have that kind of capital.
How can that be?
This bathhouse is one of the most
historically significant in the empire,
dating all the way back
to the age of the republic.
Historical significance or not, this place
isn't easy to keep up and running.
That's strange.
From the looks of things, there are still
a number of guests who come here.
They seem to enjoy
a bathhouse of this style.
But there are very few.
The amount of money we're losing
in waterway usage fees
along with the cost of labor far outweighs
the revenue we're bringing in.
And that's just a part of our problems.
As of late, we've only been met
with one setback after the other.
Problems?
Recently,
we've had some new guests show up.
And ever since they started coming here,
most of our customers
have decided to leave.
And who are these guests?
[hearty laughing]
[chuckling]
[grunting loudly]
[gasps]
These hooligans you see before you
are former reserve troops from Germania.
Spending 25 years in the army
has earned them Roman citizenship.
Apparently, they found their way
to this area somehow
and have decided
to make themselves at home.
Good gods, how utterly uncivilized!
These barbarians don't know the first
thing about entering a bath properly!
No matter how prestigious
a bathhouse may be,
if these are the people
that infest the waters everyday,
respectable customers
will simply stop coming.
And there's no telling what they might do
if someone were to dare tell them off.
No, please don't do anything reckless!
I'm telling you, Sir Modestus,
these men won't listen
to a single word you have to say!
[ominous music]
Hey there, disrespectful ruffians!
Huh?
How dare you disgrace this bath by washing
your clothes and disgusting bodies.
What do you filthy mongrels
think the bath is for?
I will only say this once.
The bathwater is not for washing whether
it be your bodies or your belongings!
If you can't get that concept
through your thick skulls,
I suggest you leave this place at once!
[sighs]
We are recognized as Roman citizens!
And Roman citizens can do
as they damn please in Rome!
Please, that's enough!
You would be correct
but the only ones who can do as they
please are Romans whose hearts are filled
with a sense of immense pride and dignity!
You Neanderthals don't even understand
how to enter a Roman bath properly.
You're no Romans and you never will be!
-[dramatic music]
-[grunts]
You son of a…
Fulfill your satisfaction
with a good punch
and then promptly leave this place.
-[grunting]
-[groans]
[groaning]
[man] Sir Modestus, are you alright?
[water splashes]
Okay, that's it. I've had enough
of you water buffoons.
You've worn out your welcome,
now leave this place immediately!
The bath is a space for all to relax and…
-[gentle percussive music]
-[Lucius grunts]
Why, if my eyes do not deceive me,
I've come to the other world again.
I of all people entered the bath
with my clothes on?
[gentle lighthearted music]
If someone were to find me like this,
they would think I'm no better
than those disgusting barbarians.
[door closes]
Evening.
Hmm.
Encountering one of
the flat-faced individuals
never fails to put my heart at ease.
They may even be more conscientious
of their hygiene than we Romans.
Oh yeah, that's nice.
And even their manners…
[sighs]
They're impeccable!
[man 1 grunts]
Looks like there's only two in right now.
[man 2] We got to get in
while the getting's good.
So much of whether one can properly
relax and decompress in the bath
depends on those
one has bathing around them.
Perhaps these men with the flat faces
who enjoy the act of bathing
with their entire being
are in fact the best people
to bathe with of all.
Hello there, fellas.
I tell you what,
this bath always hits the spot.
If all those living in the Roman provinces
were to adopt their lifestyle,
we could be assured of peace no matter
how far our great borders stretched.
Surely they would be able
to come to understand us Romans
by bonding
through the beautiful art of bathing.
-[door opens]
-[laughing heartily]
[gasps] What? Germans?
[tense dramatic piano music]
[loud grunting, laughing]
BODY SOAP
Hey, you need soap?
-Yeah!
-Heads up.
Thanks, comrade!
[men laughing heartily]
Why you little…
[old man] Excuse me
but would it be possible for you
to refrain from washing yourselves
in the bath like that, please?
Hmm?
That method of bathing might be fine
where you folks come from
but here in Japan,
we do things a bit differently.
I'd appreciate it
if you could bathe the Japanese way.
Ha! [chuckles soflty]
Like this?
The old man says
to wear this on your head!
Oh, that looks nice on you!
-[men laughing]
-[sighs] They just don't understand.
These miscreants, how stubborn!
[in Roman] Stop it, all of you!
-[grunts]
-Huh?
[in Roman] Where do you think you are?
Why don’t you show some manners!
[laughing loudly]
[in Roman] What's so funny?
We don't know what those funny words mean!
[laughs]
Don't bother us again. You got it?
And don't bother getting up.
[men snickering]
Unforgivable!
You guys think this foreigner
is trying to help us out?
He's a polite man for sure
but way out of his depth here.
-[door closes]
-[man] Oy! I brought you beers!
Oh yeah, now we're talking.
[man] All right!
[men] Cheers to our health!
-[spits]
-Hey, watch it, that's disgusting.
[in German] No, look at that!
[dramatic music]
Huh?
What are you doing over there?
[grunts softly]
You're trying to screw with us?
[in Roman] I’ll give you a
taste of what a real Roman is like!
Are you good, chief?
[grunting]
[Lucius] Hold on. Facing
an unarmed opponent with spear and shield
is not courteous to one's foe.
Good,
there's another to even the playing field.
[in Roman] Wait.
Take this.
[grunts]
Thank you for the weapon.
What is… that strange stance?
Though he seems ignorant
to the ways of war,
I can't just approach blindly.
-[tense music]
-[grunting softly]
Take this! [grunts]
[groaning]
-[tense music]
-[scoffs]
[Lucius] These barbarians
are not to be taken lightly.
It's possible they were special forces
of some kind.
I can’t let my guard down.
Do your worst.
[laughs] Old Zerbigov,
our man was Vladivostok's
representative in the Russian national
fencing tournament for a reason.
But the guy with the strange language here
doesn't seem too bad himself.
However…
this battle is far from over.
I won't lose!
[snickers]
[laughing heartily]
I see.
It seems this childish brute
is just toying with me.
And yet…
[grunting]
He's going for another head on attack?
Guess he's just a dumb one-trick pony.
You're stubborn, huh?
[groaning]
[panting]
[grunts] Now I'm getting mad!
I think I ought to go get someone
to stop these two.
Yeah.
We have come this far.
[Lucius]
I shall take you down, vile hoodlum.
[grunting]
[panting]
One cannot partake in a bathhouse brawl
for very long
without the heat tiring them out.
Yet this little tussle
has caused me to work up quite a sweat.
Is he seeking a truce?
Very well. Frankly, I am also at my limit.
-Worked up a pretty mean sweat there.
-Don't I?
They're going
to get in the bath like that?
But that's…
[in Roman] Hey!
Wait.
-What you say? Still got some fight left--
-Hold on.
[in Roman] Look at that.
Where are you pointing?
FOLLOW THE PROPER BATHING ETIQUETTE!
[lighthearted music]
Oh, wow!
So that's why the guy got so angry.
[in Roman] You have to first
wash yourself here. Come and try it.
Doing this will help
to keep the bath water clean.
Take that towel off
when you go in the bath.
That also helps to keep the water clean.
It's a public bath,
so let's keep it clean.
[man] Now I've never heard of a brawl
in a bathtub of all places
but you've got to put a stop to it
before things get bloody.
[manager]
I mean, that's easier said than done.
[man] Come on now,
hurry up and do your job.
What a pain.
-[lighthearted music]
-Huh?
[sighing]
Well, I'll be.
[manager]
There's no brawl that I can see here.
In fact, they're being very polite.
What a satisfying sense of accomplishment.
It fills me with joy
to know they finally realized
the bath is not to be used
for washing away your filth
but for putting oneself at ease
to reach total bliss.
To be honest, I was pretty worried
for a second there.
All's well that ends well.
[Lucius] The flat-faced people
are confronted with the same problems
as we Romans.
And so they've decided to draw up their
rules in advance to avoid such nonsense.
They have attained a level of genius
I fear I shall never surpass.
These brilliant flat faces…
A WHILE LATER
[man] You have done us
a great service, Sir Modestus.
I can't thank you enough.
It's beginning to look like
I'll actually be able
to keep the doors to this place open.
And it's all thanks
to those nifty stone tablets
you commissioned
from that friend of yours, the plasterer.
The idea of giving form to the rules
and regulations of the bathhouse,
my, it's simply wonderful! [chuckles]
-[soft uplifting music]
-[men laughing]
With proper instructions
out on display like this,
even those barbarians have come around
to the Roman way of bathing.
Well now, so you burly fellows were
Legio VII Gemina reserve troops, huh?
That's right. We fought in the name
of Rome for 25 long and glorious years.
It was a very, very long time.
I miss home quite a lot
but I just can't get enough
of all these Roman women.
Ha! Me neither, that's why we came to Rome
in the first place.
[men laughing]
If I've learned anything from you, sir,
it's to never give up, even if it seems
like you've run out of options.
[Lucius] The flat faces have taught me
yet another valuable lesson.
In order to enjoy
the pleasantries of the bath fully,
one must follow the proper etiquette.
That they seem to have learned this
as well is a triumph for the ages.
It will never cease to amaze me
just how truly peaceful
relaxing in a bath is.
[Marcus] Hey, Lucius!
Got another one of your carvings
for the baths.
Where should I put it?
With the others. Thank you, Marcus!
[Lucius] It's heartening to know that
this is also a concept
the flat faces understand
on a level of such deep comprehension.
Well, that makes four of them.
If it's not too much trouble,
could you hang them immediately?
Okay, sure.
Once we're done,
what do you say we grab some chicken?
[chuckles]
Without a shadow of a doubt,
if your father and grandfather were here
to see you now,
they would be absolutely beaming
with an overwhelming sense of pride.
[laughing]
[gentle flute music]
There's still a great many things
I do not know.
So I'll continue learning
and focus on my work day in and day out.
[Titus] Hey, Lucius.
It's been a while.
Look who it is. Titus, it's been too long.
How have you been?
Yeah, well, you know, same old same old.
Although Lucius, it seems like
you've really taken to your work.
I suppose.
It's great to hear you're in good health.
Come on. Say hello to the man.
Oh.
[Lucius] He's from that day.
Wow, you've gotten so big!
It's good to see you again, Mr. Lucius.
I always love coming to this bathhouse.
Is that so?
I see you have an eye for quality.
Ever thought of
designing thermae yourself?
Hey now, buddy, you're not scouting my son
right in front of me, are you?
[chuckles]
You've really made
quite a life for yourself, Titus.
Oh, how's it going, Titus? You came!
Well now, how about we take a dip?
We'll kick back and shoot the breeze.
[guffaws] Great idea.
-I'll catch up with you guys in a minute.
-[Marcus] Nice.
[Marcus] All right, let's do this!
[Titus] Sounds good, see you soon.
[indistinct chatter]
[gentle music]
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Author Ms. Mari Yamazaki
embarked on a journey to rediscover
Japan's bathing culture.
Wow, this is incredible.
This is the Hoshi Onsen
that I've been dreaming of.
[guide] This is Hoshi no Yu.
[Mari] It's amazing.
I've seen pictures of this,
but it's much more impressive and charming
when you see it in person.
Thank you.
This is a rustic bathhouse
that was built in 1895.
-1895?
-Yes.
We have preserved
this place ever since then.
The hot spring is issuing directly
into this bathtub.
-That's amazing.
-Yes.
So it's coming up from underneath?
Yes, I can see it bubbling.
The temperature is perfect.
[Mari] It would be very difficult
if the hot spring
from the source was very hot,
like around 90 degrees.
We don't heat the water,
lower the temperature, or add water to it.
The guests can enjoy
the water that is coming
directly from the source.
You can't adjust the temperature?
No.
This hot spring is in its natural form.
When you take a closer look,
you'll see that
sometimes the water is actively bubbling,
and sometimes it's very still.
It really gives you
the impression that it's alive.
Yes, it does feel like it's alive.
I feel like I'm able
to communicate with it.
It makes me wonder
what they're trying to tell me.
Yes, that's right.
Look! Did you see that?
Just as we were talking right now…
Yes, it's very…
active today.
-[lively shamisen music]
-[Kenjiro Tsuda] Thermae memory.
Ms. Yamazaki sketched
a memorable moment from this trip.
[Mari] This drawing depicts how I thought,
"I have accepted your strong will
by means of the hot spring
and the earth's grace."
I've been to many hot springs before,
but this is the first time
where I felt the water was alive.
I felt the hot spring's strong will,
here at Hoshi Onsen.
This inn is built around the concept
that the hot spring is the main character.
I think this is exactly
the kind of place Lucius is looking for.
So if a Roman like him came here
and decided to take home
the concept of preserving
a historical hot spring
like this Hoshi Onsen…
I think that will be a good thing.
[Kenjiro Tsuda]
Thermae Romae. The Hot Spring Tour.
Ms. Yamazaki's journey will continue
as she searches for new hot springs.
[gentle music]